---
title: 'Collaboration Framework for Math Courses'
date: 2026-04-24
permalink: /posts/2024/04/collaboration-framework-math-courses/
tags:
  - guest_post
  - collaboration
---

_Guest post by Nicola Ablett, nablett@uwaterloo.ca_

My name is Nicola Ablett, and I am a fifth-year Data Science student at the University of Waterloo. This term, I had the wonderful opportunity to continue working as an Educational Research Assistant with Diana, focusing on a new initiative - developing a Collaboration Framework for math courses. Over the past few months, I’ve been involved in everything from survey design and literature reviews to website development and presenting our work to faculty. As the term wraps up, I’d like to share a bit about what I worked on and some of the key highlights from this project.
The main focus of my term was the creation of a Collaboration Framework for Math Courses. The goal of this initiative is to provide instructors with a clear and flexible way to communicate expectations around student collaboration on assessments. Early in the term, we sent out a faculty survey to better understand current practices and perspectives on collaboration. This resulted in some helpful data, as well as the creation of a focus group of interested instructors. Their feedback led us in the right direction when creating the framework.
In parallel, I conducted research into collaboration practices at other institutions and in educational literature. Looking at examples from universities like McGill, UBC, and Princeton helped inform our approach and ensured that our framework aligned with broader best practices. No other universities had created a framework along the lines of what we were looking for, but we still gained some great information. One key takeaway was the importance of clarity: students benefit greatly when expectations around collaboration are explicitly stated, rather than implied.
As the project evolved, I helped design the structure of the framework itself. We developed a set of clearly defined collaboration levels, based on a two-dimensional system (the amount of collaboration permitted, and the amount of acknowledgement needed), along with icons and descriptions that instructors can easily incorporate into their course outlines.  A major consideration throughout this process was ensuring that the framework supports instructional choices - its purpose is to clarify what is allowed, not to encourage or discourage specific types of collaboration. More information on the framework itself can be found on the Collaboration Framework website.
The best part of my term was presenting our work at the annual Math Teaching Colloquium. I shared our survey findings, walked through the draft framework and website, and gathered feedback from faculty members. It was especially exciting to hear that many instructors expressed interest in using the framework in their courses. Instructors will be able to pilot the framework in the upcoming term and feedback from both instructors and students will be incorporated into the final version.
Overall, I had an incredibly rewarding four months working on this project. This role allowed me to contribute to an initiative that has the potential to improve teaching and learning experiences across the faculty - while developing many skills in the process. I’m excited to see how the Collaboration Framework continues to evolve, and I hope that our work helps make expectations around collaboration clearer and more supportive for both instructors and students.
